Blog post for the storage write removal before conditional termination bug. (#191)
ethereum/solidity-blog: _posts/2022-09-07-storage-write-removal-before-conditional-termination.md

---
layout: post
published: true
title: 'Removal of Storage Writes Before Calls to Conditionally Transaction-Terminating Functions'
date: '2022-09-22'
author: Solidity Team
category: Security Alerts
---
On September 5, 2022, a bug in Solidity's Yul optimizer was found by differential fuzzing.

> The bug was introduced in version 0.8.13 and primarily affects via-IR code generation with enabled optimizer. However, it can also affect optimized legacy code generation with inline assembly blocks involving user-defined functions.

Reviewer: would say: user-defined assembly functions

[Solidity version 0.8.17](https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/releases/tag/v0.8.17), released on September 07, 2022, provides a fix.

We assigned the bug a severity of "medium/high".

## Which Contracts are Affected?

A prerequisite for a contract to be affected is the use of ``return(...)`` or ``stop()`` in an inline assembly block (the Solidity ``return`` statement is not affected). Such an inline assembly call will not return (as in continue control flow after the statement), but instead result in an early successful (i.e. non-reverting) termination of the entire transaction.

> If this termination of the transaction happens conditionally within a function, i.e. the function can either successfully terminate the transaction or return (as in exit to continue control flow after the call at the call site), the optimizer may incorrectly remove state changes before a call to the function.

Reviewer 2: I think it might be better to avoid clarifications here and instead just add a paragraph about the difference between termination and a revert and between Solidity and Yul `return` in technical details.

Author: I hope this is clearer in the new version. Generally, a bit unfortunate that we pretty much have to distinguish between returning functions and functions calling ``return(...)``, though...

This happens in cases, in which the state change before the function could be considered redundant, if the fact that the function can terminate the transaction was ignored.

When using the legacy code generator, the Yul optimizer step responsible for the bug will be run on each inline assembly block in isolation and hence the above conditions have to occur inside one inline assembly block. While still possible, this makes the occurrence of the bug with legacy code generation less likely (see the section of Technical Details below for examples of affected assembly snippets).

However, the new via-IR code generation translates the entire contract to Yul and runs the optimizer on all of it. In this case, the bug can be triggered more easily. The following is a minimal example:

```
contract C {
	uint public x;
	function f() public {
		x = 1; // This write used to be removed by the yul optimizer.
		g();
		x = 2;
	}
	function g() internal {
		// The important aspect of this function is that it can both return to the caller and terminate the transaction.
		// The bug will show its effects in the cases in which it terminates the transaction, since the state change above will be missing.

> 		if (msg.data.length > 4) return;

Reviewer 2: I just now realized that it's `4` because you're checking if there's anything past the signature. It's simple in hindsight but still, maybe we could use something like `msg.value == 0` to make it clearer to users that it's just a dummy condition that does not mean much?

Reviewer: Yeah, let's just add a parameter.

Reviewer: It could even be `bool _terminateEarly`

Reviewer 2: No one reads the manual. Or comments :P

		assembly { return(0,0) }
	}
}
```

Compiling the above via-IR with enabled optimizer will result ``f()`` without additional calldata to incorrectly return without modifying ``x``.

For a concrete contract, the bug may still be prevented, in case the optimizer inlines the function before running the problematic store removal step, e.g. the following is almost
identical, but unaffected, since ``g()`` will be inlined (in the snippet above the ``return;`` prevents easy inlining):

```
contract C {
	uint public x;
	function f() public {
		x = 1;
		g();
		x = 2;
	}
	function g() internal {
		if (msg.data.length <= 4)
			assembly { return(0,0) }
	}
}
```

> ## Technical Details

Reviewer 2: I think it would be best to have an "Impact" section that touches upon actual use cases that might be affected and what's the worst thing that can happen to your contract if it's affected.

Reviewer 2: You could say the same thing about many bugs. I think that trying to find a good, practical example actually helps with assessing severity.

But, well, it was pretty hard to come up with something sensible for the previous bug so maybe we can do without it...

On the Yul level the issue manifests if the following sequence occurs:

> - A storage write occurs (e.g. ``sstore(0, 1)``).

Reviewer 2: Also, the store has to happen directly in the block that performs the call, right? Or can one nested in another function also be removed?

Reviewer 2: What about this one? Can it?

- A user-defined Yul function is called and this function both has a control flow path terminates the transaction and a control flow path out of the function.

> - Another storage write occurs that makes the first storage write above redundant (e.g. ``sstore(0, 2)``).

Reviewer 2: I feel like this should actually be in "Which Contracts are Affected?" and a lot of what is there now should be here in "Technical Details". If I wanted to check if my contract is affected without going into details, I'd probably want to see such a concise list of conditions needed to trigger the bug.

Author: The problem is that this sequence is only accurate for this happening on the yul level during optimization. Which patterns in solidity can lead to it is more complicated... that's why I'd consider this rather a technical detail than the usual conditions for affected contracts...

In this situation, the optimizer will treat the first storage write as globally redundant, despite the fact that the called Yul function may successfully terminate the transaction, in which case the first storage write is not redundant at all.

> The following is a full example of a vulnerable Yul snippet:

Reviewer 2: To me `vulnerable` implies that it can be exploited as a security bug. Which maybe it can, but this example is not showing that :)
```suggestion
The following is a full example of a affected Yul snippet:
```

```
{
  function f() {
    if gt(calldatasize(), 4) { leave }
    return(0,0)
  }
  sstore(0, 1) // This sstore will incorrectly be removed.
  f()
  sstore(0, 2)
}
```

> At the call of ``f()``, the first ``sstore`` should already be marked as ``used`` by the optimizer, since the control flow path of ``f()`` reaching the ``return(0,0)`` relies on it.

Reviewer 2: Maybe we should add some explanation about how the steps works so that it's clear what `used` means in this context? I.e. the way I described it in https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/pull/13479#discussion_r963099289. Because technically the value might not be used - it's just exposed to the outside and can *potentially* be read.

Author: Only reading the comment in the other PR now - but the new version of the blog post hopefully explains the optimizer step better already.

Reviewer 2: Yeah, I think it does explain it well now.

However, the optimizer failed to mark it as such, resulting in the second ``sstore`` marking it as ``unused`` and staging it for removal.

The issue only occurs in the presence of a call to a conditionally successfully terminating Yul function that survives the optimizer.
The following similar looking snippet is not affected, since the optimizer will inline the call to ``f()`` before performing
the buggy optimization step for the removal of storage writes.

```
{
  function f() {
    if iszero(lt(calldatasize(), 4)) { return(0,0) }
  }
  sstore(0, 1)
  f()
  sstore(0, 2)
}
```

In this case, ``f()`` will be inlined, resulting in

```
{
  sstore(0, 1)
  if calldataload(4) { return(0,0) }
  sstore(0, 2)
}
```

> In which both ``sstore``s are correctly retained.

Reviewer 2: The description of the step would also make it clear why it has to be in a function to get triggered. I.e. that we're marking the functions as reverting/terminating/continuing.

We assigned the bug a severity of "medium/high".

## Which Contracts are Affected?

A prerequisite for a contract to be affected is the use of ``return(...)`` or ``stop()`` in an inline assembly block (note that ``return(...)`` here refers to the builtin inline assembly function, not to the ``return`` statement of Solidity). Such an inline assembly call will not return from the current function, but instead result in an early successful (i.e. non-reverting) termination of the entire external EVM call.

If your contract doesn't contain any inline assembly block with ``return(...)`` or ``stop()`` statements, you're unaffected.

If it does and this early termination happens conditionally within a function, the optimizer could incorrectly remove storage writes before calls to the function.

More concretely, the bug can occur if a contract contains the following pattern:

1. A storage write.

> 2. A call to a function that conditionally terminates using inline assembly as described above, but may also regularly return to the caller.

Author: I'll skip the "continues", though - it can also be a ``return;`` or in Yul a ``leave``, in which case it merely "continues" in the sense of continuing on the call site...

> 2. A call to a function that conditionally terminates using inline assembly as described above, but may also regularly return to the caller.

Reviewer 2: I'd still count it as continuing :)

3. Either of the following:
   a) Another (unconditional) storage write overwriting the write in (1).

>    b) An unconditional revert.

Reviewer 2: Looking at github's preview, this does not seem to be valid syntax :)

Author: Changed it to items, but need to verify that that works.

Reviewer 2: Seems to work in github preview.

With legacy code generation, all of this, i.e. steps 1-3, need to happen in a single inline assembly block and the function call in (2) needs to be a call to a user-defined assembly function (see below for examples of affected Yul snippets). Also note that during legacy code generation, the Yul optimizer is only run on inline assembly snippets that do not refer to Solidity variables, further reducing the amount of potentially affected cases.

> However, when using via-IR code generation the entire contract is first translated to Yul and then optimized as a whole. In this case, 1-3 can happen in solidity code and only the function called in (2) needs to involve an inline assembly block calling ``return(...)`` or ``stop()``. Note that due to inlining, this inline assembly block can also merely occur in another nested function call, i.e. any call in (2) that can both return to the caller and terminate via assembly is susceptible.

Author: It does say that 1 through 3 can all happen in Solidity :-). I can remark that the inline assembly block in 2 is required, since the compiler won't generate return or stop otherwise.

The following is a minimal example that will exhibit the bug if compiled via-IR with enabled optimizer:

> ```

Reviewer 2: Not sure about the blog, but on github there's no highlighting if you don't enable it explicitly.
````suggestion
```solidity
````

Reviewer 2: Wow, Yul has highlighting on github now!

```yul
if iszero(0) {
    mstore(0, 0)
} 
```

contract C {

> 	uint public x;

Author: Arguably, you need for it to be public, since otherwise the incorrect state won't be visible to the outside world :-).

> 	uint public x;

Reviewer 2: Not easily, but it's still there on the blockchain... And it still triggers the bug, doesn't it?

But, anyway, not that important. Just wanted to point out that this can be cut out but if you included it for a good reason, then fine :)

	function f(bool a) public {
		x = 1; // This write used to be removed by the Yul optimizer.
		g(a);
		x = 2;
	}
	function g(bool a) internal {
		// The relevant part of this function is that it can both return to the caller and terminate the transaction.
		// The bug will show its effects in the cases in which the transaction is terminated (i.e. if a is false).
		// In this case the write x = 1 above will be missing.
		if (a) return;
        assembly { return(0,0) }
	}
}
```

Compiling the above via-IR with enabled optimizer will result in ``f(false)`` to incorrectly terminate the transaction without modifying ``x``.

> For a concrete contract, the bug may still be prevented, in case the optimizer inlines the function before running the problematic optimizer step, e.g. the following contract is almost identical, but unaffected, since ``g()`` will be inlined (in the snippet above the ``return;`` prevents easy inlining):

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For a concrete contract, the bug may still be prevented, in case the optimizer inlines the function before running the problematic optimizer step, e.g. the following contract is almost identical, but unaffected, since ``g()`` will be inlined (in the snippet above the Solidity-level ``return;`` prevents easy inlining):
```

```
contract C {
	uint public x;
	function f(bool a) public {
		x = 1;
		g(a);
		x = 2;
	}
	function g(bool a) internal {
		if (!a)
			assembly { return(0,0) }
	}
}
```

> To check whether your contract is actually affected, you need to trigger the condition leading to the assembly ``return(...)`` or ``stop()`` and verify that all storage writes that should have happened in the code leading to it are correctly performed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To check whether your contract is actually affected, you need to trigger the condition leading to the assembly ``return(...)`` or ``stop()`` and verify that all storage writes that should have happened in the code leading to it were correctly performed.
```

   
## Technical Details

> The Yul optimizer step responsible for the bug is meant to remove storage writes that it can determine to be redundant. A storage write is considered redundant in either of the following two cases:

Reviewer 2: Optimizer steps are documented in the docs so it would probably be a good idea to mention its name and abbreviation. 

Also maybe say that one way to completely mitigate this bug with earlier compilers would be to set a custom sequence without this step?

Reviewer 2: Do we want to mention that a custom sequence potentially mitigates it?

> - A subsequent write unconditionally overwrites the written value.

Reviewer 2: I wonder if it might be worth emphasizing that it's enough that all possible code paths after the function call lead to the value being overwritten. I.e. it's not necessarily a single write operation and not necessarily with the same value. This might not be obvious to people.

Author: I'll actually have to check this, but I'll change it for the time being.

- The transaction unconditionally reverts after the write.

So similarly to above, the general pattern is:
1. a storage write, then
2. potentially unrelated code, and finally 

> 3. either another storage write overwriting the write in (1) or an unconditional revert.

Reviewer 2: (1) and (2) also have to happen within the same function or both be in the top-level block, right?

Reviewer 2: I think this is the last important thing to discuss here. So is what I said above true? If it is, then I think it makes it significantly easier to verify if you code is affected so I think it's worth mentioning.

Author: Isn't that more confusing than helpful to mention? I mean, it's true that that's a prerequisite for the optimizer step - but in reality inlining will mess with this anyways...

Reviewer 2: Ah, good point about inlining. But if not for that I think it would be helpful. I.e you don't have to consider if you're doing these things in some nested call. Only at the same level.

But yeah, I guess this really applies only to Yul and at the Solidity level it might be harder to tell if code will end up at the same level or not.

Author: The Yul optimizer will run the Yul inliner before it runs the redundant store eliminator... so even on the Yul level, it doesn't help that much - it'd only really be helpful if you run the redundant store eliminator in isolation or something like that, which is rather obscure :-).

The bug is due to the treatment of certain function calls in (2).

If a function call is performed between (1) and (3), the optimizer has to consider the control flow behaviour of the function call, e.g. whether control flow may continue beyond the call, whether the called function always reverts or always successfully terminates. However, in the case that the control flow conditionally may continue after the call to a function, but the function call may also terminate the transaction (see examples below), the optimizer incorrectly still behaved, as if the control flow *always* continued after the function.

Hence a subsequent overwrite or unconditional revert in (3) results in the write in (1) to be removed, even though (2) may in fact terminate and is supposed to retain the storage write in (1).

So on the Yul level the issue manifests if the following sequence occurs within a Yul block during optimization:

1. A storage write occurs (e.g. ``sstore(0, 1)``).
2. A user-defined function is called and this function both has a control flow path that terminates the transaction and a control flow path out of the function.

> 3. Either of the following:
>   - Another storage write occurs that makes the first storage write above redundant (e.g. ``sstore(0, 2)``).
>   - The control flow unconditionally reverts (e.g. ``revert(0, 0)``)

Reviewer 2: Github seems to see this as two separate lists with such a small indent.
```suggestion
3. Either of the following:
    - Another storage write occurs that makes the first storage write above redundant (e.g. ``sstore(0, 2)``).
    - The control flow unconditionally reverts (e.g. ``revert(0, 0)``)
```

In this situation, the optimizer will treat the first storage write as redundant, despite the fact that the called Yul function may successfully terminate the EVM call, in which case the first storage write is in fact not redundant at all.

> The following is a full example of a affected Yul snippet:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following is a full example of an affected Yul snippet:
```

```
{
  function f() {
    if gt(calldatasize(), 4) { leave }
    return(0, 0)

>   }

Reviewer 2: These Yul snippets are indented differently than the Solidity ones above.

  sstore(0, 1) // This sstore will incorrectly be removed.
  f()
  sstore(0, 2)
}
```

> At the call of ``f()``, the first ``sstore`` should already be marked as required by the optimizer, i.e. it should not be considered for removal regardless of what happens afterwards, since the control flow path of ``f()`` reaching the ``return(0, 0)`` already relies on the ``sstore`` happening.

Reviewer 2: How about this? "Should be" is kinda ambiguous to me. Might refer to something that should have happened but didn't or something that did happen :)
```suggestion
In the absence of the bug, the first ``sstore`` would have been marked as required by the optimizer upon encountering the call to ``f()``, i.e. not considered for removal regardless of what happens afterwards, since the control flow path of ``f()`` reaching the ``return(0, 0)`` already relies on the ``sstore`` happening.
```

> However, the optimizer failed to mark it as such, resulting in the optimizer marking it as redundant once it sees the second ``sstore`` overwriting it.

Reviewer 2: A bit of duplication here:
```suggestion
However, the optimizer failed to mark it as such, marking it as redundant instead once it sees the second ``sstore`` overwriting it.
```

> The issue only occurs in the presence of a call to a conditionally successfully terminating Yul function that survives the preceding optimizer steps.

Reviewer 2: How about this?
```suggestion
The issue only occurs in the presence of a call to a conditionally terminating Yul function that does not end up being inlined by the preceding optimizer steps.
```

Author: The idea in "surviving the optimizer" was that any kind of optimization may lead to it vanishing, e.g. the condition may be simplified to unconditional true or false, etc. - but yeah, I'll change it to inlining, that's the most likely thing to prevent it.

Reviewer 2: Fair enough. In that case your version sounds more precise. I could not think about anything other than inlining.

Author: Ok, rolled it back :-).
